---
layout: post
title: RingoJS Modules and how to fix the Global Object
---

I've been wanting to write about modules in [RingoJS] for some time. The last
time I did, Ringo was still called Helma NG and [CommonJS] didn't exist yet, so
a lot of things have changed since then.

Ringo modules follow the CommonJS [Module specification][CommonJS Modules], so
understanding them will not only help you grasp the basic building blocks of
Ringo itself, but of virtually any CommonJS [implementation][CommonJS implementations]
out there.

But Ringo modules go a bit beyond CommonJS. For instance, there are alternative
ways of exporting and importing module functionality in Ringo that are more
convenient in certain situations.

More importantly, Ringo's way of implementing modules als fixes what in my
opinion is JavaScript's biggest single problem: the shared global object. And it
does so without any changes to JavaScript as a language, so there's no reason
this method couldn't be adopted by other JavaScript embeddings - even the
browser, if the ECMAScript folks decided this was a good idea.

Let's start with the basics first, which is CommonJS Modules. If you already
know everything about this, you may want to skip the next section and move
right to the Ringo specific parts.

## CommonJS Modules

At its core, [CommonJS modules] are JavaScript scripts that rely on a few extra
functions and objects provided as `free variables` (meaning they're made
available by the module environment) to connect to each other. These free
variables are:

 * The `require` function. This function takes a module identfier such as
   "ringo/args" as arguments and returns the exported API of the corresponding
   module.

   How exactly a module identifier (or id) is mapped to a module is
   described below, but essentially the id is converted to a file name such
   as "ringo/args.js" which is then looked up in some directory.

 * The `exports` object. This is a plain JavaScript object used to
   export the module's API. The exports object is what the `require` function
   returns when the module is imported by other modules, so any property
   assigned to it is publicly available.

 * The `module` object. This is a JavaScript object that provides meta information
   to the module itself, such as the id and location of the module itself as
   well as the id of the main module.

## Resolving Module Ids

For the process of mapping a module id to an actual JavaScript resource, Ringo
uses a module search path. This is essentially an ordered list of directories
that will be checked when looking for a given module.

When Ringo is started, the module search path just contains the standard module
library and the installed packages, but it is exposed in an array-like object
at `require.paths`, so programs can inspect and manipulate the module search
path at runtime using square brackets and all the array methods:

{% highlight javascript %}
require.paths[0] = "/usr/lib/ringo";
require.paths.unshift("/home/hannes/modules");
{% endhighlight %}

CommonJS also defines a way to load modules relative to the current module by
starting the identifier with "." or "..". For instance, requiring module
"./baz" from module "foo/bar" will resolve to module "foo/baz".

Additionally, Ringo, like a few other
CommonJS implementations, allows to use absolute paths as module identifiers
to load modules from outside the module search path.

## Ringo Module Extensions

The CommonJS modules specification was kept deliberately small. Ringo provides
some extra niceties for exporting and importing stuff. The downside to using
these is that your code is tied to Ringo, but it's relatively easy to convert
the code to "pure" CommonJS, and I've also written a [command line tool][commonize]
for that purpose.

One Ringo extension is the `include` include function. This is similar to
`require`, but instead of returning the other module's exports object it
directly sets each property of the exports object in the calling module's scope.

`include` is great for shell work and quick scripts where typing economy is
paramount, and that's what it's meant for. It's usually not a great idea to use
it for large, long lived programs as it conceals the origin of top-level
functions used in the program.

For this purpose, it's more advisable to use `require` in combination with
[JavaScript 1.8] destructuring assignment to explicitly include selected
properties from another module in the local scope:

{% highlight javascript %}
var {foo, bar} = require("some/module");
{% endhighlight %}

The above statements imports the "foo" and "bar" properties of the API exported
by "some/module" directly in the calling scope.

On the exporting side, Ringo provides an `export` function that takes a variable
number of local variable names to be exported from the current module.
Internally, this just copies the given variables to the module's exports object,
so it's just a way to keep a module's exports in one place.

{% highlight javascript %}
export("foo", "bar", "baz");
{% endhighlight %}

## Module Scope

Scope can be one of the more confusing aspects in JavaScript. (A quick Google
search suggests that the main area of confusion is actually the
this-object in the presence of multiple nested functions. The best way to think
about the this-object is as just another function parameter with special
passing and naming convention. But I'm digressing.)

Scope defines how variable names are looked up. In JavaScript there is a
top-level scope - the global object - and each function gets its own scope,
sometimes called the activation object. These scopes are arranged in a
chain with the nested function's scope using its surrounding scope as parent,
and name lookups moving up the scope chain from child to parent.

Thus, JavaScript is largely [lexically scoped][lexical scope], meaning that
functions can access variables defined in their surroundings. This is good,
because it gives us [closures], one of the things that make JavaScript great.

Lexical scope in JavaScript is not without flaws, however. Maybe the biggest
problem is in fact the global object, which is the top level scope shared by all
scripts. If multiple scripts execute in the same context, they all run in the
same top level scope. If they define top level variables with the same name,
the last script wins. This is illustrated in the following diagram:

![scriptscope]

To work around this problem, various workarounds have been adopted, from
using only a single global variable using a special name such as "$" or "_"
to shunning the global scope all together by putting all code within closures.

Ringo solves this problem on a fundamental level by giving each module its
own top level scope to run in. The global object is still there, but it's not
in the scope chain. Instead, it is the prototype of all the module scopes, as
illustrated in the following diagram:

![modulescope]

As can be seen, the global object is no longer the place where variables are
allocated. Regardless of with or without `var`, top level variables will be
created in the module's own scope. The global object with all the standard
objects such as `Object`, `Array`, or `String` is still there, though, providing
an environment that is totally compatible with the one found in browsers.

There you are, no more fighting for the global namespace. Now get out there
and write some cool Ringo modules!

## Outlook: ECMAScript Module Discussion

Coming later!

[ringojs]: http://ringojs.org/
[commonjs]: http://wiki.commonjs.org/
[commonjs modules]: http://wiki.commonjs.org/wiki/Modules/1.1
[commonjs implementations]: http://wiki.commonjs.org/wiki/Implementations
[commonize]: http://github.com/hns/commonize
[javascript 1.8]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en/new_in_javascript_1.8
[lexical scope]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scope_(programming)#Lexical_versus_dynamic_scoping
[closures]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Closure_(computer_science)
[javascript needs modules]: http://blog.mozilla.com/dherman/2010/07/08/javascript-needs-modules/
[scriptscope]: /images/scriptscope.png
[modulescope]: /images/modulescope.png

