---
layout: post
title: "Threads in JavaScript: yes it can"
---

In the context of mainstream JavaScript, multithreading often gets to play the
role of the [bogeyman]: When somebody starts complaining about the pains of
callback-based asynchronous programming, chances are someone else comes along to
paint a dark picture of deadlocks and race conditions that come with threads.
The conclusion then is usually that callbacks are the lesser evil, or maybe that
coroutines or actors are the way to go, but unfortunately aren't available in
JavaScript today. (Actually, coroutines are part of JS 1.7 and scheduled for
inclusion ES Harmony in the form of [generators] - yay!)

Not that this picture is completely wrong. Threads *are* [tricky] when combined
with shared mutable data. If you think you can master them then you probably
haven't done a lot of it. I've done some over the years, and it makes [Erlang]
with its actor based message passing, lightweight processes, and immutable data
look quite attractive. [Clojure] and Scala have both been very successful in
bringing different aspects of Erlang to the JVM. For JavaScript, the mainstream
programming model has been event-based single threaded operation, which makes
perfect sense for clients, and is fine for servers with low or medium workload.

The problems with single threaded event loops (and similarly, purely cooperative
multithreading) on the server start to show when concurrency increases. Only
scheduling on I/O may not be enough when you have hundreds or thousands of
requests going on at the same time, and this will show in increased latency and
[reduced throughput]. If you want to write a server that performs well under
these conditions, you really want to [use both] preemptive multithreading *and*
nonblocking I/O.

So preemtive threading does provide great performance characteristics that are
hard to get by any other means. But then JavaScript spoils it with its mutable
data model, right? Well it's actually not that bad. Having worked on and with
multithreaded server-side JavaScript for 10+ years, here are two points I'd like
to make:

1. Threads are not evil, shared memory locking is.

2. Depending on coding style and environment, multithreaded JavaScript can range
   from piece of cake to arcane science.

The following is based on the actual implementation of and experience with
threads in [Rhino] and [Ringo]. As a historical note, Ringo started out with
shared-nothing threads where each thread got its own version of each module
scope and modules were able to opt-in to shared state. Since shared modules
proved to perform much better and be easy to write, that has been reversed and
modules now default to shared.

## The good: functional == lockless

The great news is that if you write your programs in a functional style, you may
not have to worry about concurrency problems at all. Functional means that
your functions should not rely on mutable state outside themselves and thus be
free of [side effects]. Let's repeat this, because it's really cool: If you
program functionally you get all the benefits of multithreading, such as
preemtive concurrency and scaling across processor cores, without any of the
downsides, such as race conditions or locking.

Fortunately JavaScript supports functional, side-effect free programming quite
well compared to, say, Java, where objects typically encapsulate mutable state.
Unfortunately, it also supports the exact opposite of functional programming
with its global object and pseudo-classes. Ringo improves this a bit by getting
the global object [out of the scope chain] and thus out of the way of the
programmer. The only way in Ringo to set a global variable is by directly
assigning to the `global` property.

Also, web facing [JSGI] modules typically consist of a flat list of function.
Let's look at a simple JSGI module that will run multi-threaded on Ringo:

{% highlight javascript %}
var response = require("ringo/jsgi/response");
var mustache = require("ringo/mustache");

exports.index = function(req) {
    return responseHelper("./templates/welcome.html",
        {title: "Hello World!"});
}

function responseHelper(template, context) {
    var temp = getResource(template).getContent();
    return response.html(mustache.to_html(temp, context));
}
{% endhighlight %}

As you can see, the only thing declared outside the `index` and helper functions
(and thus the only thing that is shared between threads calling these functions)
are the module import statements. If these modules are thread-safe (ideally by
using the same functional style of programming), your whole application will be.
And you could easily move read-only data such as the cached template content out
into module scope without too many worries.

Now JavaScript is not a purely functional language. Eventually, you'll want or
need to have shared mutable data somewhere. We'll look at ways to do that in the
last section. But before that, I'd like to talk about one otherwise great
feature of JavaScript that can have inconvenient side effects when combined with
threads.

## The bad: closures == shared state galore

Closures are kind of an "impurely" functional concept where
functions are able to access their containing scopes, even when called from
somewhere else. This is a highly useful concept that allows you to attach
data to functions when passing them around. Unfortunately, when running a
nested function in a separate thread, it's also recipe for race conditions.

What makes this from a theoretical to an actual problem in Ringo is the
existence of the [ringo/scheduler] and [ringo/promise] modules, both of which
take a function as arguement and execute it in a new thread. Of course, the most
convenient way to use these modules is to define the callback functions in place
as closures.

For example, here's a (highly contrived) example that uses the `setTimeout`
function from `ringo/scheduler` to create a race condition:

{% highlight javascript %}
var {setTimeout} = require("ringo/scheduler");

exports.doSomething = function() {
    var message = "original";
    setTimeout(function() {
        message = "modified";
    }, 0);
    return message;
}
{% endhighlight %}

In contrast to event-loop based JavaScript, `setTimeout` calls the function in a
separate thread. Since it is called with `0` as second argument, the function
may be started immediately, running concurrently with the rest of the containing
function. Thus, it's unpredictable whether the inner function set `message` to
"modified" before the outer function returns it or not.

## Dealing with shared state

Having seen how multithreading affects JavaScript, here are some ways Rhino and
Ringo let you cope with it.

### Visibility

Visibility in the context of multithreading means that writes to a variable
by one thread are visible by other threads. This is a challenge with modern
hardware with its multiple cores, multiple levels of caches.

Rhino solves the visibility problem on a fundamental level by declaring specific
fields of its JavaScript object implementation as volitile. Thus, when working
with JavaScript objects and scopes in Rhino you should not normally experience
problems of visibiltiy. Changes done by one thread should be immediately visible
to others, and you can generally expect JavaScript objects and arrays to behave
well under concurrent access.

### Locking

As we saw above, concurrent access to mutable data usually requires locking.
Rhino provides a `sync` function that corresponds to the `synchronized`
keyword in Java. `sync` takes a function and an optional lock object as
arguments, and it returns a function.

{% highlight javascript %}
sync(function() {...});
sync(function() {...}, lock);
{% endhighlight %}

In the first form, the function returned by `sync` synchronizes on the
`this`-object it is invoked with. In the second form the returned function
synchronizes on the lock argument. Synchronizing means that at each point in
time at most one thread may run any function synced on the lock object. When
another thread tries to invoke a synced function on the same object, it will be
blocked until the first thread exits its synced function.

Let's look at an example of the closure above that fixes the race condition
using synced functions:

{% highlight javascript %}
var {setTimeout} = require("ringo/scheduler");

exports.doSomething = function() {
    const lock = {};
    var message = "original";
    var fn = sync(function() {
        setTimeout(sync(function() {
            message = "modified";
        }, lock), 0);
        return message;
    }, lock);
    return fn();
}
{% endhighlight %}

We're adding a `lock` object at the same level as the data we want to protect.
(Note that we wouldn't need an explicit lock object if the functions we want
to synchronize were invoked with the same `this`-object.) Then we pack both
the remaining code of the outer function and the inner function into a synced
function. Since the outer synced function is alway invoked before the inner
one, the timeout callback has to wait until the outer synced function is done.
Thus, this version of `doSomething` consistently returns "original".

Locking is a very complicated topic that is impossible to cover in any depth
here. I'll just say that coarse grained locking is generally easier and less
risky but also less performant than fine grained locking. When dealing with
multiple locks it's a good idea to always acquire them in the same order to
avoid deadlocks.

However, a good alternative to doing your own locking is to use data structures
that are already written for concurrent use.

### Concurrent data structures

The [java.util.concurrent] package provides classes that don't just wrap
collections with synchronized methods but provide special implementations that
get by with minimal or no locking. These classes are available on any Java
virtual machine and Rhino's Java integration makes using these classes very easy.

Even more advanced are Clojure's [persistent data structures]. These ingenuously
designed collections are immutable and thus thread-safe, but provide mutation
methods returning new versions of themselves that shared as much as possible of
its structure with the old version. Since these data structures are immutable
they get away without any locking and are surprisingly fast.

## Summary and outlook

As we have seen, multithreading in JavaScript has its highs and lows. In my
opinion the pros clearly prevail. Still, I'm thinking about how the few
problematic spots could be improved, especially concerning the `ringo/scheduler`
and `ringo/promise` modules.

The fact that JavaScript functions are closures over mutable shared state is
maybe the biggest stumbling block when trying to implement safer threading
constructs such as Erlang/Scala like Actors. The way it is, the smallest unit of
code we can deal with in a side-effect free way is the module, which is not very
satisfactory.

One solution I'm considering is an `isolate` function that takes a function as
argument and detatches it from its parent scope, making it behave like it was
defined in global scope (which is practically read-only in Ringo). It's also
conceivable that an actor framework might do this automatically before invoking
a function.

One potential source of inspiration is Clojure. Clojure's [agents] might be a
better fit for JavaScript than actors. Instead of sending data to a piece of
code, you send code to a piece of data to replace it asynchronously. Also,
Clojure's persistent data structures described above look like a nice fit for
Ringo.

The biggest problem with threads as I see it is that they are not visible when
looking at the code. You just have to know about them. Once you do you're much
better prepared to sail around the dangerous cliffs. I hope this article helps
getting closer to that goal.

If you found this interesting please consider giving [Ringo] a test drive.
You may like it!

[bogeyman]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bogeyman
[generators]: http://wiki.ecmascript.org/doku.php?id=harmony:generators
[tricky]: http://mailinator.blogspot.com/2009/06/beautiful-race-condition.html
[increased latency]: http://www.ostinelli.net/a-comparison-between-misultin-mochiweb-cowboy-nodejs-and-tornadoweb/
[reduced throughput]: http://amix.dk/blog/post/19577
[use both]: http://hns.github.com/2010/07/02/versatility.html
[side effects]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Side_effect_%28computer_science%29
[out of the scope chain]: http://hns.github.com/2010/07/30/modules.html
[jsgi]: http://hns.github.com/2010/07/02/versatility.html
[rhino]: http://www.mozilla.org/rhino/
[ringo]: http://ringojs.org/
[ringo/scheduler]: http://ringojs.org/api/master/ringo/scheduler/
[ringo/promise]: http://ringojs.org/api/master/ringo/promise/
[java.util.concurrent]: http://download.oracle.com/javase/6/docs/api/java/util/concurrent/package-summary.html
[persistent data structures]: http://blog.higher-order.net/2010/06/11/clj-ds-clojures-persistent-data-structures-for-java/
[Erlang]: http://erlang.org/
[Clojure]: http://clojure.org/
[agents]: http://clojure.org/agents
