---
layout: post
title: "Introducing Workers in RingoJS"
---

A lot of things have changed since my [last blog post], in which I tried to 
give an assessment of multithreading issues in RingoJS. 
Ringo's master git branch has recently switched from the old multi-threaded 
shared data model to one of shared-nothing worker threads, making that 
last post pretty much obsolete.

The reason for making such a fundamental change wasn't so much any particular 
technical problem we had. The main motivation was the general difficulty of 
understanding and predicting multithreaded code - things like developing a 
mental model of what's going on in your code, or debugging race conditions or 
deadlocks.

In this post I'll present Ringo's new way of dealing with threads and 
concurrency.

## Worker Basics

The new Ringo still supports threads, but they come in the form of workers. 
A worker is a thread that operates on its own private set of modules and is 
therefore isolated from other workers. To summarize: Threads in Ringo no 
longer share modules among each other.

The primary means of workers communicating with each other is by asynchronous 
message passing. This is done using [an API][worker api] loosely modeled after 
the W3c [Web Workers] specification, but I took some liberties to deviate from 
the spec where it made sense. For example, workers may share global data, but 
they have to do so explicitly (see "Sharing data between workers" section below).

Like Web Workers, each Ringo worker has its own event loop that is guaranteed 
to run in a single thread, meaning that scheduled functions and external events 
will only be processed as soon as no other code is running. This is a big step 
from the previous multi-threaded setup in Ringo. The message is: if you need 
multiple threads, use workers.

While Ringo workers each have their own set of modules to work on, they do 
share the global object with its standard constructors and prototypes.
This is safe because the global object in Ringo plays de facto 
[a read-only role][ringo global], and this setup allows us to easily share 
objects between workers because they share the same prototypes and constructors
(something that is not true with Web Workers).

## Example code

Let's have a look at how the worker API looks in practice. Here's a simple 
script that acts both as command line script and as worker module. The `main`
function called when running as command line script creates a new Worker, 
adds a callback function and passes a greeting message to the worker. The 
worker will then send back a reply to its parent script.

{% highlight javascript %}
// Module "ringo/worker" exports the Worker constructor
var {Worker} = require("ringo/worker")

function main() {
    // Create a new workers from this same module. Note that
    // this will create a new instance of this module as workers 
    // are isolated.
    var w = new Worker(module.id);

    // Define callback for messages from the worker
    w.onmessage = function(e) {
        print("Message from worker: " + e.data);
    };

    // Post a message to the worker
    w.postMessage("Hi there!");
}

function onmessage(e) {
    print("Message from main script: " + e.data);
    // Post a message back to the event source
    e.source.postMessage("What's up?");
}

// If running as command line script call main()
if (require.main === module) {
    main();
}
{% endhighlight %}

Note that the `onmessage` function which handles messages to the worker is not
exported by this module. This is on purpose because it is not meant to be 
called directly by other modules. Instead it should be called by the worker's 
own thread.

The [examples] directory in the RingoJS source tree contains more worker samples, 
covering topics such as error handling and coordination between workers using 
synchronous callbacks and [semaphores].

## Workers in web apps

Workers are not only for app developers, they're also used 
internally in many places in Ringo (remember, every thread is now a worker).
Web applications previously used threads in Ringo, so it's natural they're now
using Workers. (Ringo may at some point support other models such as pure 
single-threaded web apps.)

As long as your app only responds to a single HTTP request at a time, you won't
notice much difference beetween old and new thread model. Ringo workers are 
reused between requests, so your app should basically run in a single worker.

However, as soon as you start serving requests in parallel, things start to get
more interesting. Requests will be processed in separate workers and you'll 
no longer be able to share state by simply delaring top-level module variables 
like you previously could. The next section explains how you can work around 
that if you need to.

## Sharing data between Workers

There are two ways to allow unrelated workers to communcate with each other:
good old **global variables** and **singletons**. 

Because in Ringo the top-level scope is provided by the module script scope
you have to be explicit in order to define a global variable (I can't repeat 
how good that is often enough). The way you do this is by assigning to the 
`global` variable, a predefined variable pointing to the shared global scope.

Here's an example of defining a global variable for a read-only configuration 
object:

{% highlight javascript %}
// Define a global variable using the global property
global.config = {
    title: "RingoJS"
};

function getMessage() {
    // Note that we can directly access config because 
    // current module scope inherits from global
    return "Welcome to " + config.title;
}
{% endhighlight %}

Because two workers can execute the above code simultanously, there is no 
guarantee that the global config object won't be created more than once. Often
this is not a problem. However, for objects that *must* only be created once
Ringo provides the `module.singleton()` method.

{% highlight javascript %}
// Define a singleton providing a name and factory function.
// If the singleton has been previously created it will be returned, 
// otherwise the factory will be invoked exactly once to create it.
var config = module.singleton("config", configFactory);

function getMessage() {
    return "Welcome to " + config.title;
}
{% endhighlight %}

## Working with external events

As I said above, workers encapsulate an event loop running a single thread. 
This poses some restrictions on how external events (coming from Java code) 
can be dispatched to JavaScript. 

For this purpose, Ringo now comes with a new [JavaEventEmitter] class/mix-in 
in the `ringo/events` module. JavaEventEmitter is similar to `EventEmitter` 
but takes a Java interface as argument. It then builds a Java class on the fly
that implements the given interface, allowing calls to Java methods to be 
dispatched to JavaScript callbacks in either a single or multiple workers.

The way this is done is very simple and intuitive. If you register a JavaScript 
function as event listener with a JavaEventEmitter, the function will always 
be called in its own worker, on the single event loop thread of the worker. 
This is necessary because functions are bound to their parent scope and therefore 
to their worker. Calling a function originating from one worker in another 
worker basically breaks the single-threaded-ness of the scope in which the 
function was defined, and that's something we want to avoid.

For an example of how this is used in Ringo check out the code the adds 
[WebSocket support] in `ringo/httpserver`.

To dispatch Java events to multiple workers, use a JavaScript object instead 
of a function as event listener. The object must contain two properties called 
`module` and `name` holding the module id and function name that should be 
invoked to handle the event. Each time an event occurs, the event emitter will 
get a dedicated worker, invoke the function with the given name on the given 
module, and release the worker when it's done.

## Differences to Web Workers

The biggest difference between Ringo workers and W3C Web Workers
is probably the fact that Ringo workers share one set of global objects. 
This brings about a few other differences between the two.

First, it makes workers cheaper to create and run, because we don't have to 
instantiate a full JavaScript context for each worker. In a simple test 
I did that involved launching thousands of workers, Ringo performed almost 
10 times better than Firefox 7. 

Another difference that has to do with shared globals is that in Ringo we
don't have to use JSON serialization of messages sent between workers. With 
Web Workers this is required because passing objects unserialized would leak 
prototypes and scopes from one worker to the other.

Of course, JSON serialization also serves the purpose of making message 
parameters read-only. After a message has been serialized and deserialized, it
is decoupled from its original state. 

Finally, shared globals allow the easy sharing of data between workers through
the `global` variable as described above.

Ringo's worker setup is clearly more permissive than Web Workers. One scenario 
where tightening the rules could make sense could be the introduction of 
remote workers, for then it would make sense to use the same semantics for 
local and remote workers (mandatory serialization, no shared data). For now 
I think the relaxed rules should work fine.

## Event loop vs. long running (choose one)

Ringo now offers you the best of both worlds. You get worker threads 
that can run as short or as long as they please (that's the idea behind 
workers, right?), and that are isolated from each other except if you 
deliberately decide to share state between them.

And you get a event loop in each worker, allowing you to do callback based 
programming with the same single-threaded semantics you know from the browser.

Of course, one has to be careful when mixing the two. Long-running 
code (for instance code calling blocking APIs) will starve the event loop. 
If you rely on your event loop to be responsive and fast, you need to make 
sure your code executes and returns quickly. 

The answer to this is to be clear about which coding style to use within each 
worker and stick to it. It' totally ok to mix event-loop workers with the
long-running kind in any way you like - in fact that's what workers are here for.

For example, you could have an app consisting of a thight event loop spinning 
out long running tasks to one or multiple workers. Or you could do it the 
other way round: a multi-worker app that uses a single event loop worker for 
some shared state processing. Both models should work nicely as long as you 
stay consistent within each worker.

If all this talk got you interested worker support is available right now 
in [Ringo master] branch. And if you give it a try take a minute to 
[get in touch] and let us know what you think!

[last blog post]: /2011/05/12/threads.html
[ringojs]: http://ringojs.org/
[web workers]: http://www.w3.org/TR/workers/
[worker api]: http://ringojs.org/api/master/ringo/worker/
[workers branch]: https://github.com/ringo/ringojs/tree/workers
[ringo global]: /2010/07/30/modules.html
[examples]: https://github.com/ringo/ringojs/tree/master/examples
[semaphores]: http://ringojs.org/api/master/ringo/concurrent/
[JavaEventEmitter]: http://ringojs.org/api/master/ringo/events/#JavaEventEmitter
[WebSocket support]: https://github.com/ringo/ringojs/blob/cc7aff07ec0c9c2c7c141b3a9b73ce215d2810db/modules/ringo/httpserver.js#L218-223
[Ringo master]: https://github.com/ringo/ringojs
[get in touch]: http://ringojs.org/wiki/Community

